---
layout: post
title: "Division"
date: 2024-07-31
---

Growing up solely in the 21st century had been a mixed bag of great and terrible things. We have advanced as a society greatly; There are so many things that were simply a figment of our imagination 10–20 years ago that are part of our daily reality. Enough about the good that has happened, though, the topic of today’s prose is how divided we have become as a country.

The Us vs. Them mentality has plagued human existence, well since humans have existed. It’s something we can’t seem to escape. But why can’t we? Do we enjoy fighting? Does it serve to further us as a society? Do we just want to be superior to “the other”?

I think there are two main reasons as to why the world, more specifically the United States, feels and seems so divided in today’s world:

Social media and people living their lives online.
Intentional division disseminating from the powers that be.
Obviously there is much more at play in this complex topic, but I’d like to stick to being a shorter-winded writer and not write academic dissertations, thank you very much.

Social Media

So why has something that is commonly seen as unifying and even has the word “social” in it been so dividing for us? The creators of these platforms want people to feel like they’re being social and interacting with people on their websites and apps. And yes, in some ways they are, but it’s so different from a real interaction. Social Media companies want their users to be using their service for as long as possible and to become addicted. Addicts bring in more revenue, so why would they have any interest in having their users consume in a healthy way?

They don’t, and this creates people who solely live their lives online. They get all of their interactions there, buy products, consume news, entertain themselves. I would say I’d like to see this type of person live in a time before the Internet, but I think the majority of these people are products of their environment and wouldn’t struggle that much.

“You think you just fell out of a coconut tree? You exist in the context of all in which you live and what came before you” -Kamala Harris

While it’s amusing to make fun of this quote (it really is quite humorous), she isn’t wrong in her second sentence. Even those who have resisted and opposed social media and technology as a whole find themselves either going along with it or struggling a bit in modern life without it. We are all products of the Social Media era.

But why exactly has the widespread adoption of social media created division? I have failed to answer that question yet, but it’s the algorithms that run the sites that create widespread division and isolation. While it is speculative to say whether these algorithms are intentionally designed this way or if it is unintentional, it doesn’t really matter at this point. If this was the way it was meant to go, I truly see big tech and social media giants as evil and wanting the worst for society. If it was unintentional, how have they not noticed this yet and addressed the problem?

They don’t care! Like I said before, what interest do they have in the well-being of their users? The personal data is already being sold off for pennies on the dollar to third-parties, so yeah, that’s how much value they assign to you. Echo-chambers or not, as long as the shareholder value is being generated, they don’t give a shit.

Intentional Division

There may be some intentional division present in the first reason, depending on the explanation given to divisive algorithms. But I’d like to change focus from the one’s running social media to the one’s running the country.

I don’t think there are two parties, as we currently see it. I strongly believe in the idea of the “uniparty” where the illusion of being enemies is portrayed while in reality they all work together to help one another. Why can’t we as a population have this mentality! Why should someone’s political view influence whether they deserve respect, dignity, safety, or success? Unfortunately, a lot of people nowadays will base those things on where a given person lies politically.

Was it always this way? To a certain extent, sure, but not like it is now. I feel sorry for the people who live with so much hate towards 1/2 of their fellow citizens. Is that any way to produce a society that helps each other, that prioritizes kindness and love to fellow humans? Absolutely not, and the flame of division is only fanned by those in power, as it creates more unity among your followers while creating division among those who disagree with you.

Yet again, though, why would they be doing anything else? It goes back to my earlier point: is there an interest in the well-being of their supporters, or are you just a number to them?

Hope

The good part is that we as individuals can directly fight back against this through how we navigate our own lives. Be aware of your surroundings, learn to disagree but not hate, be the change you want to see in the world, and talk to people! Most of all, keep hope and spread love. The future of the world is in all of our hands.
